This file was updated on 9/21/2001 for WTQ modification.

The ADV Package, which provides the capability to specify
advective-transport observations, has been modifed for use in
MODFLOW-2000.  This package was documented in

  Anderman, E.R. and Hill, M.C., 1997, Advective-transport observation
  (ADV) package, a computer program for adding advective-transport
  observations of steady-state flow fields to the three-dimensional
  ground-water flow parameter-estimation  model MODFLOWP: U.S. Geological
  Survey Open-File Report 97-14

Input requirements have been modified from those documented in the
Anderman and Hill report.  The changes, compared to Appendix A of the
report are:
  
  In the name file, the file type must be listed as "ADV2" instead of "ADV".

  Input to the ADV Package is read from the file that has file type
  "ADV2" in the MODFLOW name file.  Variables are read in free format
  (instead of the formats listed in OFR 97-14), except where arrays are
  read by the U2DREL array reading module or in a user-specified format.

  The following variables are read from Line 1: 
  
  NPTH, NTT2, IOUTT2, KTFLG, KTREV, ADVSTP, FSNK
  
  Where NPTH, NTT2, IOUTT2, KTFLG, KTREV, and ADVSTP are as documented in
  OFR 97-14, and FSNK is a flag and a fraction indicating how weak sinks
  are treated:

    If FSNK < 0, particles will be discharged at cells with any amount of
    discharge to boundary conditions.
    
    If FSNK > 0, particles will be discharged at cells where discharge to
    sinks is larger than the specified fraction of the total inflow to the
    cell.

  Data sets 1, 2, and 3 are not required and must be omitted.

  Data sets 4 and 5 are read as originally documented.

  Data set 5A is read as originally documented, with the addition of a new
  integer variable, PLOT-SYMBOL, which is read in format I5 following TT2.
  PLOT-SYMBOL is used in ADV as it is in the other observation-process
  packages.

  A new data-file record, consisting of one line containing one variable,
  is read after data set 5A.  The variable is IOWTQAD and is read in free
  format. If IOWTQAD is greater than zero, data sets 6 and 6A are read in
  a slightly different way than documented.  WTQ is an array containing 
  the variance-covariance matrix on advective-transport observations [L2].
  The array is square with dimensions equal to the total number of advective-
  transport observations (for example, NLOC times two if the tracking is two 
  dimensional or three if the tracking is three dimensional) and for each 
  observation location is entered in the order X, Y,and Z, if applicable.
  For elements WTQ(I,J), if I<>J, WTQ(I,J) is the covariance between 
  observations I and J; if I = J, WTQ(I,J) is the variance of observation I.
  Note that the variance-covariance matrix is symmetric, but the entire matrix
  (upper and lower parts) must be entered.
