Modifications by M.L. Merritt and L.F. Konikow to the Lake Package
(Oct. 2003 and Jan. 2004)

	The Lake Package has been modified to enable it to run with (1)
mixed steady-state and transient stress periods, and (2) the top layer being
a confined layer.  Neither of these conditions was previously allowed in a
simulation using the Lake Package.

(1) For mixed steady-state/transient runs, NSSITR and SSCNCR must be defined
in Record 2 in the input file for the Lake Package, even if the steady-state
stress period is not the first one.  If more than one steady-state stress
period is included in the total simulation period, then the initial values
of NSSITR and SSCNCR will apply to all subsequent steady-state stress
periods.  If NSSITR and SSCNCR are needed and read in as a value of zero,
then default values of NSSITR = 50 and SSCNCR = 0.01 will automatically
override the zero values.

	The capability for using mixed steady-state/transient runs with the
Lake Package does not depend on the sequence of steady-state and transient
stress periods.  Input of minimum and maximum lake stages is as before (in
Record 3) if the first stress period is steady-state (this assures
compatibility with older data sets).  If the second or a subsequent stress
period is steady-state, then the minimum and maximum stages (SSMN and SSMX)
for those stress periods are defined at the end of Record 9a.  With this new
option, the definition for Record 9a on p. 55 of Merritt and Konikow (2000)
is modified to:

Record 9a.  Data: PRCPLK EVAPLK RNF WTHDRW {SSMN} {SSMX}

	Where SSMN and SSMX are optional parameters that are only defined
for a steady-state stress period that is not the first stress period in the
simulation.

(2) The Lake package can now be used when all or some of the model layers
containing the lake are confined.  We recommend using the Layer-Property
Flow Package (LPF) for this case, although the BCF and HUF Packages will
work too.  However, when using the BCF6 package to define aquifer
properties, lake/aquifer conductances in the lateral direction are based
solely on the lakebed leakance (and not on the lateral transmissivity of the
aquifer layer).  As before, when the BCF6 package is used, vertical
lake/aquifer conductances are based on lakebed conductance and on the
vertical hydraulic conductivity of the aquifer layer underlying the lake
when the wet/dry option is implemented, and only on the lakebed leakance
when the wet/dry option is not implemented.

(3) Other minor changes to output formats have been made.

(4) Because the Lake Stage represents a hydraulic head value that is
consistent with the calculated heads in the aquifer, the calculated values
of lake stage will now be inserted into the HNEW array at the appropriate
locations.  This will enable contouring or visualization of heads based on
hydraulic continuity between the aquifer and a lake.  Previously, because
lake cells correspond with values of IBOUND=0, the HNEW array contained
values of HNOFLO at lake cells.  If drawdown is printed, the drawdown values
shown for lake cells will represent the initial lake stage rather than
HNOFLO values (as in earlier versions of the code).

(5) The Lake Package now checks for consistency between lake cell locations
and values of IBOUND, which are supposed to be 0 at lake cells.  If the code
detects a lake cell where the value of IBOUND is not = 0, it will print a
warning message (but execution will continue).

(6) A bug was corrected to assure that a lake cell can occur in the bottom
layer of the grid.  Previously, if the executable code had been generated
with certain compilers, an array bounds error would occur in this situation.

Reference 

Merritt, M.L., and Konikow, L.F., 2000, Documentation of a
computer program to simulate lake-aquifer interaction using the MODFLOW
ground-water flow model and the MOC3D solute-transport model:
U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 00-4167, 146 p.
