


U.S. Geological Survey                                modflw96(1)



NAME
     modflw96 - Modular three-dimensional finite-difference
                ground-water flow model

ABSTRACT
     MODFLOW is a three-dimensional finite-difference ground-
     water flow model.  It has a modular structure that allows it
     to be easily modified to adapt the code for a particular
     application.  Many new capabilities have been added to the
     original model.  OFR 96-485 (complete reference below)
     documents a general update to MODFLOW, which is called
     MODFLOW-96 in order to distinguish it from earlier versions.

     MODFLOW simulates steady and nonsteady flow in an
     irregularly shaped flow system in which aquifer layers can
     be confined, unconfined, or a combination of confined and
     unconfined.  Flow from external stresses, such as flow to
     wells, areal recharge, evapotranspiration, flow to drains,
     and flow through river beds, can be simulated.  Hydraulic
     conductivities or transmissivities for any layer may differ
     spatially and be anisotropic (restricted to having the
     principal direction aligned with the grid axes and the
     anisotropy ratio between horizontal coordinate directions is
     fixed in any one layer), and the storage coefficient may be
     heterogeneous.  The model requires input of the ratio of
     vertical hydraulic conductivity to distance between
     vertically adjacent block centers.  Specified head and
     specified flux boundaries can be simulated as can a head
     dependent flux across the model's outer boundary that allows
     water to be supplied to a boundary block in the modeled area
     at a rate proportional to the current head difference
     between a "source" of water outside the modeled area and the
     boundary block.  MODFLOW is currently the most used
     numerical model in the U.S. Geological Survey for ground-
     water flow problems.  An efficient contouring program is
     available (Harbaugh, 1990) to visualize heads and drawdowns
     output by the model.

METHOD
     The ground-water flow equation is solved using the finite-
     difference approximation.  The flow region is considered to
     be subdivided into blocks in which the medium properties are
     assumed to be uniform.  The plan view rectangular
     discretization results from a grid of mutually perpendicular
     lines that may be variably spaced.  The vertical direction
     zones of varying thickness are transformed into a set of
     parallel "layers".  Several solvers are provided for solving
     the associated matrix problem; the user can choose the best
     solver for the particular problem.  Mass balances are
     computed for each time step and as a cumulative volume from
     each source and type of discharge.




                     Last change: 8 May 2000                    1






U.S. Geological Survey                                modflw96(1)



HISTORY
     Version 3.3 2000/05/02 - Error fixed in IBS code that caused
        incorrect values for critical head to be written when the
        option is invoked to save these values in an external
        file (variable IHCSV>0).  The error did not affect the
        actual interbed storage calculations, and none of the
        other model results, such as computed head and budget
        flows, are affected by the correction. There are no
        changes to any other packages.

     Version 3.2 1998/01/09 - The Flow and Head Boundary Package,
        Version 1, (FHB1) has been added. This package allows for
        assignment of transient specified-flow and specified-head
        boundaries in applications of MODFLOW-96.  The FHB1
        package is documented in U.S. Geological Survey Open-File
        Report 97-571.

     Version 3.1 1997/03/11 - Calls to the Horizontal Flow
        Barrier (HFB) Package have been corrected in the main
        program.  The main program for Version 3.0 incorrectly
        calls the HFB1RP module where it should call the HFB1FM
        module.

     Version 3.0 1996/12/03 - Updated version of overall model,
        which is called MODFLOW-96.  A number of changes were
        made to make MODFLOW easier to use and easier to enhance.
        MODFLOW-96 can use existing input data sets, and has the
        same computational methods.  Any package added to the
        original model (now referred to as MODFLOW-88) will also
        work with MODFLOW-96.

        The Preconditioned Conjugate Gradient Package, Version 2
        (PCG2) has been updated.  This requires a minor change in
        input data compared to the documentation in U.S.
        Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report
        (WRIR) 90-4048 (full reference below).  WRIR 90-4048
        specifies two lines of input data.  All of the data are
        the same except the seventh value on the 2nd line.  This
        value is named IPCGCD in WRIR-4048, but it has been
        replaced by a value named DAMP.  That is, IPCGCD is no
        longer part of the input data.  DAMP can be used to
        reduce oscillation when the solver is having difficulty
        converging due to excessive oscillation.  The value of
        DAMP is multiplied times the head change calculated each
        iteration at all cells.  Thus, if DAMP is 0.5, the head
        change is cut in half.  If DAMP is 1.0, then PCG2 behaves
        as it did prior to the addition of this capability.  DAMP
        should be set equal to 1.0 except when there is
        indication of excessive oscillation.  If the value of
        DAMP is specified as 0.0 or less, it is automatically
        changed to 1.0.




                     Last change: 8 May 2000                    2






U.S. Geological Survey                                modflw96(1)



        Also the sign of the C.B. STORAGE cell-by-cell budget
        data in the TLK1 Package was changed to match the
        standard sign convention in MODFLOW.  The change to TLK1
        does not impact computed heads or the overall volumetric
        budget; it only affects data written to a cell-by-cell
        budget file.

     Version 2.6 1996/09/20 - Added Reservoir package (RES1) as
        documented in U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report
        96-364.  Problem fixed for IBS package.  Although
        subsidence is only meant to be active for layers in which
        IBQ>0, sometimes MODFLOW performed subsidence
        calculations when IBQ<0.  Note that this was a problem
        only if negative IBQ values were specified.  That is, the
        code has always worked correctly for IBQ=0 and IBQ>0.

     Version 2.5 1995/06/23 - Added direct solution package
        (DE45).

     Version 2.4 1995/06/15 - Added transient leakage package
        (TLK1).

     Version 93/08/30 - Release with PCG2, BCF3, STR1, HFB1,
        ISB1, CHD1, and GFD1 additions.

     Version 87/07/24 - Fortran 77 version published in U.S.
        Geological Survey Techniques of Water-Resources
        Investigations 6-A1.

     Version 83/12/28 - Fortran 66 version published in U.S.
        Geological Survey Open-File Report 83-875.

DATA REQUIREMENTS
     In order to use MODFLOW, initial conditions, hydraulic
     properties, and stresses must be specified for every model
     cell in the finite-difference grid.

OUTPUT OPTIONS
     Primary output is head, which can be written to the listing
     file or into a separate file.  Other output includes the
     complete listing of all input data, drawdown, and budget
     data.  Budget data are printed as a summary in the listing
     file, and detailed budget data for all model cells can be
     written into a separate file.

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
     MODFLOW-96 is written in Fortran 77 with the following
     extension:  use of variable names longer than 6 characters.
     By default, the software is dimensioned for use with models
     having up to 90,000 cells.  MODFLOW-96 requires that file
     names needed for the simulation be defined prior to
     execution.  A Name File is used for this purpose.  Each



                     Last change: 8 May 2000                    3






U.S. Geological Survey                                modflw96(1)



     record of the Name File specifies a file type, unit number,
     and file name for each file used in the MODFLOW simulation.
     The format of this file is described in the documentation.
     Generally, the program is easily installed on most computer
     systems.  The code has been used on UNIX-based computers and
     DOS-based 386 or greater computers having a math coprocessor
     and 4 mb of memory.

PACKAGES
     This version of MODFLOW includes the following packages:

         BAS5 -- Basic Package
         BCF5 -- Version 3 of Block-Centered Flow Package
         RIV5 -- River Package
         DRN5 -- Drain Package
         WEL5 -- Well Package
         GHB5 -- General Head Boundary Package
         RCH5 -- Recharge Package
         EVT5 -- Evapotranspiration Package
         SIP5 -- Strongly Implicit Procedure Package
         SOR5 -- Slice Successive Over-Relaxation Package
         UTL5 -- Utility Package
         PCG2 -- Version 2 of Preconditioned Conjugate Gradient
     Package
         STR1 -- Stream Package
         IBS1 -- Interbed-Storage Package
         CHD1 -- Time-Variant Specified-Head Package
         GFD1 -- General Finite Difference Flow Package
         HFB1 -- Horizontal Flow Barrier Package
         TLK1 -- Transient Leakage Package
         DE45 -- Direct solver
         RES1 -- Reservoir Package
         FHB1 -- Flow and Head Boundary Package

     The user must specify the file type for each file in the
     name file.  File types for packages not in the original
     model are:

         TLK -- Transient leakage
         DE4 -- D4 Direct solver
         PCG -- Preconditioned Conjugate Gradient solver
         GFD -- General Finite-Difference Package
         HFB -- Horizontal-Flow Barrier Package
         STR -- Stream Package
         IBS -- Interbed Storage Package
         CHD -- Time-Variant Specified-Head Package
         RES -- Reservoir Package
         FHB -- Flow and Head Boundary Package


DEPENDENCIES AMONG PACKAGES
     As documented in Open-File Report (OFR) 94-59, the Transient



                     Last change: 8 May 2000                    4






U.S. Geological Survey                                modflw96(1)



     Leakage (TLK) Package does not simulate flow through a
     confining unit at any horizontal grid location at which a
     cell on either side of the confining unit is dry.  When this
     situation occurs as a result of initial conditions, the user
     can determine if this is appropriate before making a
     simulation.  However, a cell can go dry at any time during a
     simulation when using the water-table or convertible layer
     options in the Block-Centered Flow (BCF) Package.  When a
     cell goes dry on either side of a confining unit, the
     transient leakage through the confining unit immediately
     becomes zero at that horizontal location.  Users should
     check simulations to see if cells on either side of a
     confining unit are going dry at any time during a simulation
     and determine if it is acceptable for the transient leakage
     to switch to zero.  Further complications can result when
     using the wetting capabilities of version 2 of the BCF
     Package.  If dry cells convert to wet so that cells on both
     sides of a confining unit are wet, then transient leakage
     calculations will be started; however, the equations will
     not be properly formulated to simulate the previous
     conditions, so the transient flow will not be correct.
     Thus, the wetting capability should not be used for any
     model layers that connect to a confining unit that is being
     simulated with the TLK Package.

     The Time-Variant Specified-Head (CHD) Package can
     potentially cause the TLK Package to operate incorrectly if
     the CHD Package is being used to specify constant heads at
     cells on either side of a confining unit.  The TLK Package
     relies on initial head as defined by the Basic Package to
     setup initial parameters.  If the data for the CHD Package
     define initial heads (i.e., head for the first time step of
     the simulation) on either side of a confining unit to be
     different than defined by the Basic Package, the transient
     leakage calculations will be incorrect.  To avoid this
     conflict, do not use the CHD Package to define constant head
     cells on either side of a confining unit, or be sure that
     the initial head in the Basic Package exactly matches the
     initial head defined by the CHD Package.

DOCUMENTATION
     The basic documentation is contained in the following three
     reports:

     Harbaugh, A.W., and McDonald, M.G., 1996, User's
        documentation for MODFLOW-96, an update to the U.S.
        Geological Survey modular finite-difference ground-water
        flow model: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report
        96-485, 56 p.

     Harbaugh, A.W., and McDonald, M.G., 1996, Programmer's
        documentation for MODFLOW-96, an update to the U.S.



                     Last change: 8 May 2000                    5






U.S. Geological Survey                                modflw96(1)



        Geological Survey modular finite-difference ground-water
        flow model: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report
        96-486, 220 p.

     McDonald, M.G., and Harbaugh, A.W., 1988, A modular three-
        dimensional finite-difference ground-water flow model:
        U.S. Geological Survey Techniques of Water-Resources
        Investigations, book 6, chap. A1, 586 p.

     The BCF5 code is documented in several places.  It includes
     the capabilities of BCF1, BCF2, and BCF3 Packages.  The
     primary documentation is in the basic model documentation
     (TWRI 6-A1, OFR 96-485, and OFR 96-486).

     BCF2 documentation describes the addition of the capability
     to convert dry cells to wet:

     McDonald, M.G., Harbaugh, A.W., Orr, B.R., and Ackerman,
        D.J., 1992, A method of converting no-flow cells to
        variable-head cells for the U.S. Geological Survey
        modular finite-difference ground-water flow model: U.S.
        Geological Survey Open-File Report 91-536, 99 p.

     BCF3 documentation describes the addition of alternate
     interblock transmissivities.

     Goode, D.J., and Appel, C.E., 1992, Finite-difference
        interblock transmissivity for unconfined aquifers and for
        aquifers having smoothly varying transmissivity: U.S.
        Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report
        92-4124, 79 p.

     Version 2 of Preconditioned Conjugate Gradient Package is
     documented in:

     Hill, M.C., 1990, Preconditioned conjugate-gradient 2
        (PCG2), a computer program for solving ground-water flow
        equations: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources
        Investigations Report 90-4048, 43 p.

     The Stream Package is documented in:

     Prudic, D.E., 1989, Documentation of a computer program to
        simulate stream-aquifer relations using a modular,
        finite-difference, ground-water flow model: U.S.
        Geological Survey Open-File Report 88-729, 113 p.

     The Interbed-Storage and Time-Variant Specified-Head
     Packages are documented in:

     Leake, S.A., and Prudic, D.E., 1991, Documentation of a
        computer program to simulate aquifer-system compaction



                     Last change: 8 May 2000                    6






U.S. Geological Survey                                modflw96(1)



        using the modular finite-difference ground-water flow
        model:  U.S. Geological Survey Techniques of Water-
        Resources Investigations, book 6, chap. A2, 68 p.

     The General Finite Difference Flow Package is documented in:

     Harbaugh, A.W., 1992, A generalized finite-difference
        formulation for the U.S. Geological Survey modular three-
        dimensional finite-difference ground-water flow model:
        U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 91-494, 60 p.

     The HFB1 Package is documented in:

     Hsieh, P.A., and Freckleton, J.R., 1993, Documentation of a
        computer program to simulate horizontal-flow barriers
        using the U.S. Geological Survey modular three-
        dimensional finite-difference ground-water flow model:
        U.S.  Geological Survey Open-File Report 92-477, 32 p.

     The Transient-Leakage Package (TLK1) is documented in:

     Leake, S.A., Leahy, P.P., and Navoy, A.S., 1994,
        Documentation of a computer program to simulate transient
        leakage from confining units using the modular finite-
        difference ground-water flow model: U.S. Geological
        Survey Open-File Report 94-59, 70 p.

     The DE45 Package is documented in:

     Harbaugh, A.W., 1995, Direct solution package based on
        alternating diagonal ordering for the U.S. Geological
        Survey modular finite-difference ground-water flow model:
        U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 95-288, 46 p.

     The RES1 Package is documented in:

     Fenske, J.P., Leake, S.A., and Prudic, D.E., 1996,
        Documentation of a computer program (RES1) to simulate
        leakage from reservoirs using the modular finite-
        difference ground-water flow model (MODFLOW): U.S.
        Geological Survey Open-File Report 96-364, 51 p.

     The FHB1 Package is documented in:

     Leake, S.A., and Lilly, M.R., 1997, Documentation of a
        computer program (FHB1) for assignment of transient
        specified-flow and specified-head boundaries in
        applications of the modular finite- difference ground-
        water flow model (MODFLOW): U.S. Geological Survey Open-
        File Report 97-571, 50 p.





                     Last change: 8 May 2000                    7






U.S. Geological Survey                                modflw96(1)



RELATED DOCUMENTATION
     Harbaugh, A.W., 1990, A simple contouring program for
        gridded data: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report
        90-144, 37 p.

REFERENCES
     MODFLOW is widely used in the USGS and throughout the world.

     Belitz, K., and Phillips, S.P., 1993, Numerical simulation
        of ground-water flow in the central part of the western
        San Joaquin Valley, California: U.S. Geological Survey
        Water-Supply Paper 2396, 69 p.

     Prince, K.R., Franke, O.L., and Reilly, T.E., 1988,
        Quantitative assessment of the shallow ground-water flow
        system associated with Connetquot Brook, Long Island, New
        York: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Supply Paper 2309, 28
        p.

TRAINING
     Modeling of Ground-Water Flow Using Finite-Difference
     Methods (GW2096TC), offered annually at the USGS National
     Training Center.

     Advanced Finite-Difference Modeling of Ground-Water Flow
     (GW3099TC), offered annually at the USGS National Training
     Center.

CONTACTS
     Operation:
        U.S. Geological Survey
        Office of Ground Water
        Arlen Harbaugh
        411 National Center
        Reston, VA 20192

        harbaugh@usgs.gov

     Distribution:
        U.S. Geological Survey
        Hydrologic Analysis Software Support Program
        437 National Center
        Reston, VA 20192

        h2osoft@usgs.gov

     Official versions of U.S. Geological Survey water-resources
     analysis software are available for electronic retrieval via
     the World Wide Web (WWW) at:

                http://water.usgs.gov/software/




                     Last change: 8 May 2000                    8






U.S. Geological Survey                                modflw96(1)



     and via anonymous File Transfer Protocol (FTP) from:

                water.usgs.gov (path: /pub/software).

     The WWW page and anonymous FTP directory from which the
     MODFLOW software can be retrieved are, respectively:

                http://water.usgs.gov/software/modflow.html
                              --and--
                /pub/software/ground_water/modflow

     The WWW page from which the USGS MODFLOW fact sheet (a short
     description of the MODFLOW model) can be retrieved is:

             http://water.usgs.gov/public/pubs/FS/FS-121-97/

     See
     http://water.usgs.gov/software/ordering_documentation.html
     for information on ordering printed copies of USGS
     publications.

SEE ALSO
     contour(1) - A contouring program for gridded data mmsp -
                  Modular Model Statistical Processor

     moc(1) - Two-dimensional method-of-characteristics ground-
              water flow and transport model

     moc3d(1) - Three-dimensional method-of-characteristics
                ground-water flow and transport model

     modfe(1) - Modular finite-element model for areal and
                axisymmetric ground-water flow problems

     Modflowp(1) - Parameter-estimation version of the modular
                   model

     modpath(1) - Particle-tracking postprocessor program for the
                  modular three-dimensional finite-difference
                  ground-water flow model

     sutra(1) - Saturated and (or) unsaturated, constant or
                variable-density fluid flow, and solute or energy
                transport (2-dimensional finite-element code)

     vs2di(1) - A graphical software package for simulating fluid
                flow and solute or energy transport in variably
                saturated porous media







                     Last change: 8 May 2000                    9



